readme.md, before:

Xake is a make utility made for .NET on F# language. Xake is inspired by [shake](https://github.com/ndmitchell/shake) build tool.

Unlike NAnt, Cake and similar tools with imperative script style, Xake is declarative:

  * you define targets (either files or actions)
  * you describe rules on how to make particular target and which targets it depends on
  * build tool identifies dependencies and build your targets

See [documentation](docs/overview.md) for more details.

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/xakebuild/Xake.svg?branch=dev)](https://travis-ci.org/xakebuild/Xake)

## The script

The simple script looks like:

```fsharp
#r "paket: nuget Xake ~> 1.0 prerelease //"
open Xake
open Xake.Tasks.Dotnet

do xakeScript {
  rules [
    "main" <== ["helloworld.exe"]

    "helloworld.exe" ..> csc {src !!"helloworld.cs"}
  ]
}
```

This script compiles helloworld assembly from helloworld.cs file.

## Getting started

Make sure dotnet SDK 2.0+ is installed. dotnet 2.1.300+ is required to make production build as it properly write package metadata.

1. Clone the project:

    ```
    git clone http://github.com/olegzee/xake
    ```
1. Run the "Hello world" build sctipt:

    ```
    cd samples
    dotnet restore dotnet-fake.csproj
    dotnet fake run gettingstarted.fsx
    ```
1. Run the showcase script:

    ```
    dotnet fake run features.fsx
    ```
    

## Build the project

Once you cloned the repository you are ready to compile and test the binaries:

```
dotnet restore build.proj
dotnet fake run build.fsx -- build test
```

... or use `build.cmd` (`build.sh`) in the root folder

## Getting started for Mono on Linux/OSX

Make sure mono with F# is installed and root certificates are imported:

```
sudo apt-get install mono-complete
sudo mozroots --import --sync
```

TBD

## Documentation

See [documentation](docs/overview.md) for more details.

## References

* [implementation notes](docs/implnotes.md)
* [Shake manual](https://github.com/ndmitchell/shake/blob/master/docs/Manual.md)

## Mono on OSX troubleshooting

Xake requires 'pkg-config' to locate mono runtime. Pkg-config utility is deployed with mono, but it's not included in
$PATH. The options available are described on [monobjc mailing list](http://www.mail-archive.com/users@lists.monobjc.net/msg00235.html)

Commit message:

added more samples and cross-references

readme.md, after:

Xake is a make utility made for .NET on F# language. Xake is inspired by [shake](https://github.com/ndmitchell/shake) build tool.

Unlike NAnt, Cake and similar tools with imperative script style, Xake is declarative:

  * you define targets (either files or actions)
  * you describe rules on how to make particular target and which targets it depends on
  * build tool identifies dependencies and build your targets

See [documentation](docs/overview.md) for more details.

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/xakebuild/Xake.svg?branch=dev)](https://travis-ci.org/xakebuild/Xake)

## The script

The simple script looks like:

```fsharp
#r "paket: nuget Xake ~> 1.1 prerelease //"
open Xake
open Xake.Tasks.Dotnet

do xakeScript {
  rules [
    "main" => need ["helloworld.exe"]
    "helloworld.exe" ..> csc {src !!"helloworld.cs"}
  ]
}
```

This script compiles helloworld assembly from helloworld.cs file.

See [features sample](https://github.com/xakebuild/Xake/blob/dev/samples/features.fsx) for various samples and the [introduction page](https://github.com/xakebuild/Xake/wiki/introduction) to learn more about Xake.

## Getting started

Make sure dotnet SDK 2.0+ is installed. dotnet 2.1.300+ is required to make production build as it properly write package metadata.

1. Clone the project:

    ```
    git clone http://github.com/olegzee/xake
    ```
1. Run the "Hello world" build sctipt:

    ```
    cd samples
    dotnet restore dotnet-fake.csproj
    dotnet fake run gettingstarted.fsx
    ```
1. Run the showcase script:

    ```
    dotnet fake run features.fsx
    ```
    

## Build the project

Once you cloned the repository you are ready to compile and test the binaries:

```
dotnet restore build.proj
dotnet fake run build.fsx -- build test
```

... or use `build.cmd` (`build.sh`) in the root folder

## Getting started for Mono on Linux/OSX

Make sure mono with F# is installed and root certificates are imported:

```
sudo apt-get install mono-complete
sudo mozroots --import --sync
```

TBD

## Documentation

See [documentation](docs/overview.md) for more details.

## References

* [implementation notes](docs/implnotes.md)
* [Shake manual](https://github.com/ndmitchell/shake/blob/master/docs/Manual.md)

## Mono on OSX troubleshooting

Xake requires 'pkg-config' to locate mono runtime. Pkg-config utility is deployed with mono, but it's not included in
$PATH. The options available are described on [monobjc mailing list](http://www.mail-archive.com/users@lists.monobjc.net/msg00235.html)
